Okay.
You know, you're a wonderful writer and a stylist.
Can I have to hear your own question?
No.
Okay.
I get the sense that you're an explorer as much as a writer.
I use writing as a way to celebrate and to explore the world.
It takes me out into undiscovered landscapes and
into... Hi, how are you today?
Hi there.
Would you like to have?
I'd like some iced tea with some regular milk to put in.
Some milk?
Sure.
Um, I have a Bloody Mary if I saw it with you.
I don't mind.
Bloody Mary?
Yeah.
Fine.
Okay?
Okay.
Good, I'm sorry.
In fact, what I'm discovered with landscapes.
Uh, I think, I think what I said was
It's probably that writing for me plays a couple of roles, both a form of celebration and inquiry.
It's the way that I learn about the world, and it's a form of prayer.
That's wonderful.
I guess your publisher is...
promoting it as a bookend almost.
It is a companion book.
I call it a companion book.
I wonder if you could just tell me a little bit about how you moved so effortlessly into this book from that one.
Well, the truth is that I was thinking about both books at the same time.
And they're companion books in the most human and intimate sense.
Even the women who are on the covers of the book seem to know each other and belong to the same emotional family.
It's very hard to think about the senses and not think about love, which is a delicious expression of the senses, or to think about love and not think of all of the sensual treats that are in store for lovers.
One is really just an extension of the other.
But if you want to know how it is that I decided to do both of these books, I think as much as anything it's that I realized at some point that in order to understand the human condition, I was going to need to study how we perceive the world and also the most important emotion in the history of humankind, the one emotion
that is central to the lives of absolutely everyone who's ever lived, or will ever live probably, and everybody on earth, no matter what their culture is, their age, their customs, one thing we know about them absolutely is that they feel love and that it is central to their lives.
Whereas the natural history of the senses took in all of the senses,
We will not take in all of the emotions here.
Love is a large topic.
Well, actually, the senses.
That's a large topic, too.
The perfect book about love would have to take from birth to death to write and include all of consciousness.
So, of course, I had to select what was going to be important.
But I'm interested in love in the most panoramic sense.
I'm not interested in one argument about love or...
questions just for monogamy or other such things.
There are research scientists working in the field who are handling that very well.
I've been interested in the large, rich festival of love, that is, the history of love, the psychology, the great ideas that people have had about love through the ages, and science.
And in that, the chemistry, the anthropology, the neurophysiology, special topics of neuroticism that intrigue people, women and horses, men and mermaids, and things like that.
Every mother and father of a 10-year-old horse-crazy girl wants to know what on earth is going on.
And also, varieties of love, besides romantic love.
Most of the book is about romantic love.
But there are so many different complexions of love that we don't give enough prestige.
Thank you.
This is milk, right?
That is milk.
There are many complexions of love that obscure us and obsess us
and greatly alter and improve the quality of our lives.
But we tend not to give them the same prestige as we do romantic love.
But they're so important that I decided to write about them too.
And so I wrote about religious love, love of pets, altruistic love, transference love, different topics.
I actually have people in my book who are loved.
their books.
I mean, Elias Kennedy's book, Otto Defei, did you read that novel?
I mean, the man actually has almost a sexual experience as he spoke of these books and he's about to lose them.
You know, I think people are actually making proclamations of love to books.
There's a new book about collecting, about the psychology of collecting.
Yeah, I have it.
It's Princeton University.
I got it in time to footnote it.
Yeah.
I think that collectors very often get into a kind of erotic of what they are collecting, and that's not a bad thing.
Well, of course, if it's scary to excess, if anything, I mean, when they go over the cliff, then you have this wonderfully bizarre behavior.
I guess it's certainly not limited to books.
Yes, but that's not the kind of love that I'm writing about.
The kind of love I need.
is love between people, and that can be of many different sorts.
It could be gay love, it could be heterosexual love, it could be love as parent for child, or brother-sister love.
There are many versions of love that are different.
With one exception, which is the love of pets.
The love of pets?
Yes.
You mean the human love of pets or the pets?
People wonder whether or not a dog can love.
I look in my labrador retriever's eyes.
Total devotion.
And she loves me.
I think we underestimate the emotional lives of animals.
I've spent part of my life as a naturalist in the field.
And I've seen animals express so many shades of emotion.
It may be that our problem-solving abilities are better and our lives are more elaborate and our emotional lives are more complex and more hidden.
But anyone who owns a dog or a cat knows what true devotion really is and a certain kind of obsessive love.
that is unconditional and wonderful.
In fact, I think that's part of why we become so deeply fond of our pets.
They function as children in our families, but especially exempt children.
We give them names, but we withhold our criticisms and our expectations.
We don't expect them to live on our time, as we do with babies.
We don't expect them to grow up and fulfill our private fantasies of being a baseball player, a dancer, or something like that.
They don't argue with us or want to borrow the car or go out with somebody we don't approve of.
They are like children, and they even...
sometimes have facial qualities that remind us of children, especially of babies, but we make great allowances for them.
I decided that I would
trace the history of love from our oldest writings about it up to the modern day in order to see the ways in which love has changed over the different eras.
And then I would have a good look at the psychology of love and the great thoughts about love and science and all the different aspects of love as well.
When I was looking at the history,
I was surprised to find that we feel exactly the same sort of love that our most ancient ancestors did.
We even use the same language to talk about love.
If you look at the ancient hieroglyphic love poem, 53 of which remain... Which is kind of a surprise.
Yes.
We tend to think of it.
We tend to think that love itself was invested with the Greeks and that romantic love reached its height in the Middle Ages during courtly love.
But the truth is that the ancient lovers felt just what we feel today.
They say that they are experiencing lovesickness.
They say that they're on fire inside.
Bruce Springsteen writes in his songs, I'm on fire, but that's what the ancient poets said also.
They are full of the same neuroses and fantasies and obsessions and exhilarations and insecurities and uncertainties and hopes and dreams as contemporary lovers are.
the same delirium.
And so I can only assume that love evolved as an important biological mechanism to make sure that the species survived.
And you can ask yourself, why was that necessary?
There can only be one answer, that we were such an aggressive and destructive species that we needed love as a peacemaking force.
Of course, it could be separated from pleasure, too.
Yes.
But that's true.
Pleasure is not going to be enough to keep peace among people long enough for children to be born and raised and so on.
I'm not even sure that that's true.
You know, you're not going to get very successful.
We don't have love on the rest of the animal.
Well, bear in mind that children stay dependent on
for a very long time.
When children are born, it's as if they're fetuses really outside of the body.
They still are completely helpless and dependent for years until they're really on the ground and walking successfully by themselves and would be able to run away from predators.
They require a lot of looking after, and there has to be some force that would persuade a mother
to stay with that child and protect it and make sacrifices for it during that critical period.
And also, at least on some occasions, for a father to want to protect it too.
And that force, that reward, is love.
It absolutely is.
I was interested as well in your examination of the chemical, these chemicals that are involved.
That's new to me.
Yep, that was fascinating to discover too.
Because love is...
a completely natural, automatic experience of the body.
There are chemicals that come into play.
There are chemicals that flow when one is deep in infatuation, when infatuation turns to a long-term, quieter, but more enduring love of a companion.
There are chemicals
that builds up in a woman just before she gives birth.
We're back on.
We're making a good point, as I recall.
Chemicals.
Ah, chemicals.
When people fall in love, an amphetamine-like chemical drenches their body.
And that's why lovers could stay up all night talking and making love, and they seem to be on a high, and they feel completely blissed out by love.
It's a chemical bliss.
The body is stirring them to mate with the person that they're falling in love with and really feel attached to that person long enough to have a child.
When...
When a couple has been together over a longer period of time, over a few years, let's say, past the time when they indeed would have had a child, and their child would already be on the ground and walking, then another set of chemicals takes over.
The endorphins do.
And they're the chemicals of calm and reassurance.
So, yes, infatuation is very seductive, but there is something equally seductive,
about the sense of security and peacefulness that long-term spouses feel when they're together.
And that's because of another set of chemicals that takes over.
You found that this is actual research.
Yes.
Have there been any studies to indicate what might happen if there's an imbalance in these chemicals, if there's too much or not enough?
Well, that's a good question.
You know, I've often wondered,
what the chemical situation of autism is.
Here are people who are so isolated from the rest of humanity that I wonder if there is a failure of some of these chemicals in them.
For example, too low a level of oxytocin, maybe.
Oxytocin, which has been called the cuddle chemical, reaches very high levels in women just before they give birth.
it has to because there is so much stress involved in being pregnant and there's going to be the pain of birth and the baby is going to be immediately so dependent that the best the best thing for the woman is if she can instantly feel an overwhelming sense of love and a desire to cuddle her baby and that's what happens the oxytocin level rises very very high in the
studies that they've done with all kinds of animals when they raise the oxytocin level the animals become wonderful parents and they cuddle and they kiss their offspring and they raise affectionate and when the level is artificially lowered they have no interest in that so we know that it's associated with affection we know that it goes up much higher during lovemaking and especially higher in women and some people feel that that's why women especially
like to cuddle after sex because this cuddle chemical has risen very, very high inside of them.
Again, you certainly want to try and comfort everything.
I don't try to be all inclusive.
because no book about love could be... Ah, well, yes, I do bring in many different avenues of thought and feeling because I'm interested in them.
I'll start learning about the history of something, and that will lead me to think about psychology, and that might lead me to think about the chemistry.
And before I know it, I'm thinking back about some related customs.
And the whole book really has...
evolved as a fascinating journey for me in which I've been learning about love in many different aspects of our lives.
Do you set out to learn yourself and educate yourself on other subjects?
Go back to my initial question about the process of exploration and discovery.
I only ever set out to satisfy my own curiosity.
when I'm writing a book.
I love hearing from readers that something that I've written has spoken to them intimately.
I love when readers write to me and share their experiences with me.
It's important for me to feel a sense of community and belonging.
It is for all writers.
But I'm really not thinking about any of that when I'm passionately involved in writing a book.
At that point, I'm so obsessed with the subject and the desire to learn more about it that it really is a kind of romance in itself.
And do you start off with any... I mean, clearly the chemical thing must have just come your way.
But from my work on the senses, I've always been interested in...
the chemistry of mood and personality and actions.
I'm as interested in science as I am in art and always have been.
I was as a graduate student even.
I was doing an interdisciplinary degree in the sciences and the arts.
So it's very hard for me to say at what stage I become interested in the science as opposed to something else.
All of it interests me at the same time.
Were there any other surprises for you?
In every chapter.
It was a surprise to learn of love's antiquity.
It was a surprise to learn about the real Cleopatra, or the real Casanova, or what Beethoven's life was really like, or Ben Franklin's, various other people that we have misconceptions about.
It was a surprise to learn about the chemistry of love.
It was a surprise to learn the very special and ancient relationship between women and horses.
Every chapter contains some extraordinary surprises.
Do you have an explanation for that, for women and horses?
I think as all parents of ten-year-old horse maniacs know,
At a certain stage of a girl's development, horses come to embody their sexuality in some profound way.
Not that the girls want to have sex with the horses, although the experience of riding is very sexy at a time when the girls might not even have a name for what they're feeling.
But horses allow girls to perfect themselves at a time when girls don't have a lot of self-confidence,
aren't very strong, aren't sure exactly what is happening to them and how to be with other people.
They can mount up a very forceful, atavistic creature of nature and control it, and it gives their lives a sense of nurturing,
and power and control that they wouldn't have in any other way.
So I think that's one element to it.
There's psychological reasons.
There's sociological reasons.
But the main thing is that the relationship between women and horses goes back very, very far to the ancient horse worship cults throughout Europe.
Do you think there's any significance in this?
Do you remember that?
A lady with right side saddle?
Mm-hmm.
Women...
had to ride side saddle because it was quite indelicate for a woman to have anything as powerful as a horse between her legs.
But it was very awkward for the woman, not just because it was easy to tumble off backwards, but how on earth did she have her clothes fitted, given the fact that one leg was always going to be held up shorter than the other leg?
And that is, in fact, what had to happen.
She would go to a seamstress, and she would have her pantaloons done short on one leg and long on the other leg.
It was extremely awkward.
For her.
But as I say, it was considered indelicate to ride in any other way.
And on the other hand, very risque for her to ride.
At all.
That's quite dangerous.
It's not so easy to jump sides, though.
I think so.
Tell me, do you plan to continue these natural history explorations?
The next book out will be a book of nature essays about some very endangered animals that I went out to find.
It's called The Rarest of the Rare.
It'll be out next year sometime, probably towards the end of the year, but I don't know exactly when.
And I've been spending time traveling around the world finding some of the
most endangered animals, and just writing about them, celebrating them, witnessing them, describing them before they disappear.
So that's the next book.
Some of the animals you might mention?
There are some seals and birds and insects, all different kinds of animals.
No, I try not to do the obvious one, or necessarily the
These showy ones, like the panda, you know.
There are animals like dinosaurs going extinct right in front of us about whom we know almost nothing.
So I thought it would be a good idea to go out and have a look at them.
But all of my books, as you rightly observe, are about either nature or human nature.
I guess what you're saying is that it's almost a celebration of these creatures.
It's not a polemic of any sort.
It's not a polemic, although there is an essay on biodiversity at the beginning and our relationship with nature.
No, it's a combination of description because some of these animals have not even been observed.
They're going to disappear without anyone knowing what they looked like, what they sounded like, what their habits were like.
That just seems unforgivable to me.
So it's a combination of observation and celebration.
And also a reluctance to let them disappear without at least somebody noticing.
Are there any mammals among these unknown mammals?
There are.
If you don't mind, I just assume I'll specify which one.
I understand.
But yes, indeed.
There are mammals, birds, reptiles, insects.
Wow.
And entire endangered habitat.
That sounds exciting.
And again, the focus of this piece is on these books.
Right.
But are there photographs or illustrations?
No photos.
I am the camera, as in all of my books.
Explain a little bit about that to get back.
I have a word process, and I adore it, but I pray that books will always be as eccentric as they are and portable and include
words on pages that you turn, and writing the margins of.
And this took you any number of questions.
It took us four years.
It took me three years.
But as I say, I had been working on it quietly while I was doing other things.
Because whenever I was observing animal behavior, I was quietly taking notes about their courtship and mating habits.
And when I was working on the senses, I was also thinking about the sensory aspect of love.
I end up writing a few books at the same time.
My muse is very miscellaneous, and I can be writing an essay set in the Antarctic about penguins, as I did in Moon by Whaleye, and the sensory information that I learned will go into the census book, as it did.
There will be some creative and emotional overspill, which will become home, that went into Jaguar of Sweet Laughter.
So I end up, in that case, I ended up writing
natural history of the census, the moon by whale light, jaguar of sweet laughter, all at the same time because the experiences were recording themselves in my creative mind in different drawers simultaneously.
Is it involuntary which one you work on at any given time?
Do you wake up and work on the phone?
Because I support myself through my writing, I'm not teaching anywhere at the moment,
I have to meet my deadlines first.
So that usually means that I'm writing prose first.
Case Me Magazine will ask me to write a poem to order, and I love when they do.
The last time that happened, I was asked to write a poem about the eclipse, the solar eclipse.
It's wonderful to have that excuse.
Which publication did I see?
Travel Holiday.
And you did?
Yeah.
You produced it?
Has it been published yet?
Yeah, it has indeed.
It was a seven-day cruise, seven-minute eclipse.
Perfect ratio.
And it gave me a chance to work as a poet.
That was an assignment.
Isn't that wonderful?
I know.
It's wonderful.
It's truly wonderful.
They're very enlightened people.
How long was the poem?
About 60 lines.
What they did was run a prose article by a wonderful science writer and a poem with it.
So it really was quite a splashy presentation about the eclipse by the time they were finished.
And did you observe it through all these events and stuff?
I was in New York City the day that.
I went to Baja, and you could see it very well then.
It's so eerie, I mean, particularly.
I was in the ultimate jungle in Manhattan.
I know.
But I mean, it was a beautiful way, and this sky really changed.
People were affected by it in a surprising way.
You can see why the ancients would have promised to do absolutely anything for the sun to come back.
It was so scary.
All the priests would have to do is say to them, you give me all your property and your daughters and everything else.
In the first minute, if the sky goes black or the sun will never come back, I mean, you would do it.
And you would be so amazed that the priest could predict it that you would believe they could do anything.
In terms of your writing routine, are you a rewriter or a reviser?
I do an enormous amount of revising.
I'm a compulsive reviser.
But I don't think of it in any sort of negative way.
I love playing with language, and I love trying to choose exactly the right word, especially the right verb, that will capture some moment of existence.
No, I'm very disciplined now.
I work so hard, and part of my work
is on deadline.
So I'm very disciplined about it.
I know that I have to concentrate a huge amount of energy when I'm working.
And I'm very good at turning it off in the time when I'm not working.
I didn't used to be like that, but I've become more and more disciplined.
Or I've become more secure in my creativity.
I'm not sure which it is.
But I start working about 9 in the morning.
And before that, I go biking.
five or ten miles.
I love to do that.
Or get some other exercise.
When I start to work, it has my full attention.
That's all I'm doing.
And I can sit happily working for four or five hours at a stretch.
Be very, very content.
Then I'll stop and I'll have lunch with a friend and the work will not be on my mind.
And then I'll go back to work for a few hours in the afternoon and work
with all of my heart and soul during that time.
And I'll stop at about 5 o'clock.
I never really can do anything after then.
And I'll have dinner and watch a movie or something at night.
Yes, things will be on my mind in some subconscious way, but I'm very good at shutting off.
The dynamo.
When do you do your revisions?
First thing in the morning?
Or is that all part of the day?
What I do when I'm working on a book is I begin each day by rereading the entire book.
Up to that point.
The entire book?
Yes.
So I know where I am.
And in that process, of course... Even from page one to wherever you are.
Wherever I am.
Even if you're at the end, you'll...
I always start from the beginning.
If I'm at the end, I've already read it so many times that of course I can ski over some of the areas faster than others.
But yes, I sit there for a few hours in the morning when I'm towards the end of the book, reading the whole book.
And every time I go through it, there are always small changes that get made.
If I had brought my book down and I showed you the background, you'd find in pencil little page numbers and changes.
I bet when you're giving readings, the temptation is a headache.
I sometimes do.
Also, I make factual changes, if there are any, and typo changes in each of the editions, certainly when it goes into paperback.
You always repeat.
There's nothing worse.
It's Char's quote, history repeats itself, historians repeat one another.
You make a mistake and then it replicates itself.
I know, it's terrible.
I was reading, I love to read Raymond Chandler's Mysteries, but the bad news is that there are so many typographical errors in them now that it's tragic.
It's really tragic.
There are like 40 or 50 mistakes, bad mistakes.
Really?
Yeah.
In every book.
And it just breaks my heart.
Nobody's proofing them anymore.
Right.
Ethan Keenan's book, and I love it.
Whenever I find typos.
I always correct them from edition to edition.
You told me in the previous book that you actually hired a fact checker to help you.
Yes, I did.
Did you do the same with this?
No, I didn't with this one.
I did a lot of the fact checking myself.
Actually, come to think of it.
I'm sorry, take that back.
I did hire someone to do a quick fact check.
of all the spellings, the dates, the places, the numbers, things like that.
You see, as engaging a read as it is, I have to believe that accuracy is a paramount for it.
It is to me.
It is to me because I love the universe the way it is.
I don't need it to be distorted or prettied up or changed in any way.
in order to find it fascinating and lovable.
And I would like people to feel a curiosity about nature, an attachment to nature, and a delight in the experience of being human that's based on life as it really is.
You can't do that without great attention to detail.
That's perfect culture.